**Earth Science Information Partners (ESIP)** Travel and Expense Reimbursement

(This Travel Policy is for our Volunteers and Is currently being revised.  The Staff Travel Policy is located in the ESIP Employee Handbook)
==============================================================================

Travel (including registration fee) to ESIP workshops and professional
meetings at which ESIP is represented by organizing a session, town hall
meeting or informational activity is provided to ESIP Community members
leading or supporting relevant activities.

If they so desire and have no other funding mechanism to support this,
Program Committee and ESIP Board members will receive *de facto* support
to attend the ESIP January and July Meetings. In addition, ESIP
provides travel to the Student Fellows, FUNDing Friday winners according
to their positions.

Travel expenses will be reimbursed by the ESIP Office providing the
appropriate travel reimbursement form is completed and submitted within
30 days of any travel being completed. The following guidelines should
be adhered to when planning travel and claiming expenses.

The guidelines outline standards and procedures for reducing travel
costs while complying with Federal regulations for the reimbursement of
ESIP-related expenses. The intent is to maintain consistency and ensure
fair treatment for all members of the ESIP community whose travel will
be reimbursed or paid for by the organization. That is, they apply
equally to all ESIP members who receive travel support to attend ESIP
workshops, professional meetings, *etc*.

Travel expenses incurred while on ESIP business will be paid for by the
organization if they are reasonable, properly approved and
well-documented. As a result, approved persons who incur such expenses
should neither lose nor gain funds. All requests for ESIP-related travel
should be made on the [ESIP Travel Expense
form](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1A4W-U4UEhi8dP5tX5tpUh3kloxCdpHov).

The ESIP Office is responsible for tracking travel expenses and travel
reimbursement review.

Actual reasonable expenses will be reimbursed subject to any limits set
forth in these guidelines and approved budgeted travel limits.

a) **Air Travel**

Expenses for commercial air travel are reimbursed on the basis of the
actual cost incurred by the traveler using normally traveled routes in
compliance with the 'Fly America Act'
[http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/103191](http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/103191),
and at the most economical rate (__not__ first or business
class). A 'passenger receipt' is required for reimbursement, or in the
case of E-tickets, the receipt provided at the time of booking. If a
checked baggage or seat selection fee applies the receipt should also
include details of these items. Except with prior agreement of the ESIP
Office, change fees are not normally reimbursable.

b) **Rental Cars**

Rental car use should be limited to situations where other means of
transportation are not practical, economical or available. Travelers
should choose compact or mid-sized cars whenever possible, and refill
the gas tank before returning the vehicle. The traveler is responsible
for collision and liability insurance. Prior approval is required if the
traveler needs to accept the rental car company's Liability and Physical
Damage coverage. Itemized rental car receipts are required for
reimbursement.

c) **Bus, Train, Taxi Services**

A receipt should be requested to document these expenses.

d) **Personal Vehicles**

The use of personal vehicles is discouraged, except for regional travel,
and to and from a 'home' airport. Prior approval is required for all
other journeys, and such personal vehicle travel shall be reimbursed in
accordance with the GSA guidelines in effect at the time of travel.

e) **Lodging**

In the event that there is no scheduled conference or workshop hotel,
travelers are encouraged to book ordinary accommodations at mid-market
hotels or motels, and to take advantage of any available discounts.
Reasonable efforts should be made to obtain hotel accommodations at the
location per diem limit as stated in the GSA guidelines. Original
itemized hotel receipts are required for reimbursement.

f) **Conference/Workshop Registration**

Original receipts or proof of registration payments are required. Prior
approval must be obtained if the traveler wishes to attend optional
conference field trips or events that involve costs in excess of the
standard registration fee.

\[ADD GUIDELINES FOR ESIP Meeting Registration\]

-   When can we waive or discount ESIP registration fee? Possible speaker categories

    -   E.g., invited speaker not already affiliated with ESIP

    -   Potential ROI - is speaker from a potential funding agency?

    -   Support strategic goals.

    -   Recommendations

        -   Waive fee if guest speaker just for that session (no badge)

        -   Discounted rate if coming just for the day (we offer this already - \$200)

        -   Case-by-case if attending multiple days (include in travel costs - see below)

        -   Waive registration if plenary level speaker (do this now)

g) **Meal Expenses**

ESIP reimburses meal and incidental expenses based on standard GSA
per-diem rates in effect at the time of travel and according to the
geographic area involved less any meals provided by conference or
workshop. Prior approval is required for business meals where additional
professional guests are present, and reimbursement will be made on
actual cost basis.

h) **Miscellaneous Expenses**

Miscellaneous expenses, such as charges for ground transportation and
parking, are reimbursable upon submission of original receipts.

i) **Non-Reimbursable Expenses**

Non-reimbursable expenses include, but are not limited to:

-   Personal entertainment expenses (*e.g.*, movies, games, health club or spa)

-   Optional conference activities not included in the standard conference fee, for which prior approval has not been sought

-   Valet parking, unless a hotel prohibits guests from parking their own vehicles

-   Travel accident insurance premiums

-   Costs incurred by failure to cancel transportation or hotel reservations

-   Traffic and/or parking violation fines

-   Rental car accessories (*e.g.*, navigation system, infant car seat)

-   Repairs to personal vehicles used for ESIP-related travel

-   Spouse, partner or other family member's expenses

-   Laundry service

-   Room service

All requests for reimbursements of travel related expenses must be
[properly
documented](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1A4W-U4UEhi8dP5tX5tpUh3kloxCdpHov)
and submitted to the ESIP Office within 30 days of the travel being
completed. In the event of discrepancies in a reimbursement request
(*e.g.*, an absence of original receipts, non-matching receipted and
requested amounts, *etc.*) the request for reimbursement will be
reviewed by the ESIP Executive Director. If a request for reimbursement
is denied in full or in part, an appeal may be made to the Chair of the
Finance Committee who will review the business rationale for the
exception.

NOTES:

-   Travel requests can be included in committee budgets or special projects proposals

    -   To represent ESIP at some other group meeting - connection must be clear, ESIP must be explicitly represented

-   Invited speakers at committee sessions (Specific to ESIP Meetings)

    -   Travel to meeting if not local in area

    -   When can we waive or discount ESIP registration fee? Possible speaker categories

        -   E.g., invited speaker not already affiliated with ESIP

        -   Potential ROI - is speaker from a potential funding agency?

        -   Support strategic goals.

        -   Recommendations

            -   Waive fee if guest speaker just for that session (no badge)

            -   Discounted rate if coming just for the day (we offer this already - $200)

            -   Case-by-case if attending multiple days (include in travel costs - see below)

            -   Waive registration if plenary level speaker (do this now)

-   Set limit on how much ESIP will pay (e.g. ESIP will cover \$2k for travel, including registration, and anything over and above covered by participant)

This Policy was approved by the Board of Directors of ESIP on October 17, 2017. Revisions to this policy were approved by the Board on September 15 2021.
